Quickstart guide update (#723)
graknlabs/docs: typedb-src/modules/ROOT/pages/quickstart-guide.adoc

[,typeql]
----
match $t sub thing;
----

[#_get_query__get_all_emails_of_kevin]
=== Get all emails of Kevin

To retrieve all emails owned by every person with a full name that contains "Kevin"
(we have only one such person in the example database):

[,typeql]
----
match
    $p isa person,
        has full-name $fn;
    $fn contains "Kevin";
    $p has email $e;
get $e;
----

[#_insert_query__add_a_new_email_for_kevin]
=== Insert a new email for Kevin

To insert a new email (`kevin@gmail.com`) for every person with a full name that contains "Kevin":

[,typeql]
----
match
    $p isa person,
        has full-name $fn;
    $fn contains "Kevin";
insert $p has email "kevin@gmail.com";
----

Now Kevin has more than one email.

[#_update_query__change_the_newly_added_email_for_kevin]
=== Update the email for Kevin

To update the email from `kevin@gmail.com` to `kevin2@gmail.com` for every person with a full name that contains "Kevin":

[,typeql]
----
match
    $p isa person,
        has full-name $fn,
        has email $e;
    $fn contains "Kevin";
    $e = "kevin@gmail.com";
delete $p has $e;
insert $p has email "kevin2@gmail.com";
----

The query above does the following:

> - Matches the person and its email with the value of `kevin@gmail.com`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Matches the person and its email, requiring that the value is `kevin@gmail.com`.
```

Author: The value of what? It became even more ambiguous that way, IMHO. Don't you think?

Author: ```suggestion
- Matches the person and its email (`kevin@gmail.com`).
```

> - Deletes the ownership by the person over the email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deletes the ownership by the person of the email.
```

> - Inserts a new email owned by the person with value of `kevin2@gmail.com`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Inserts a new email with a value of `kevin2@gmail.com`, which is owned by the person.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Inserts a new email (`kevin2@gmail.com`) owned by the person.
```

[#_delete_query__delete_ownership_of_the_newly_updated_email_from_kevin]
=== Delete ownership over the email for Kevin

> To delete the ownership over the email "kevin2@gmail.com" for every person with a full name that contains "Kevin":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To delete the ownership of the email "kevin2@gmail.com" for every person with a full name that contains "Kevin":
```

= Quickstart guide
:keywords: getting started, typedb, typeql, tutorial, quickstart, console, studio
:longTailKeywords: get started with typedb, typedb tutorial, typedb quickstart, learn typedb
:pageTitle: Quickstart guide
:summary: Learn how to create a TypeDB database, load schema and data, perform queries.
:tabs-sync-option:
:experimental:

This Quickstart guide shows how to set up a TypeDB database and run queries.

== Prerequisites

[#_download_sample_data]
=== Download schema and data

For this Quickstart guide, you need to download and use the following files:

[#_iam_schema]
* link:https://github.com/vaticle/typedb-docs/blob/master/typedb-src/modules/ROOT/attachments/iam-schema.tql[iam-schema.tql,window=_blank]

>   -- The TypeQL define query for the IAM schema.

Reviewer: Do we often use the phrase "define query"?

Author: Yes, we do. At least, I think so. Why?

Author: Capitalized Define and Insert as proper names for queries.

//* xref:attachment$iam-schema.tql[iam-schema.tql] -- The TypeQL define query for the IAM schema.
[#_iam_microdataset]
* link:https://github.com/vaticle/typedb-docs/blob/master/typedb-src/modules/ROOT/attachments/iam-data.tql[iam-data.tql,window=_blank]

>   -- TypeQL insert queries of a sample dataset for the IAM schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  -- TypeQL insert queries for a sample dataset for the IAM schema.
```

> //* xref:attachment$iam-data.tql[iam-data.tql] -- TypeQL insert queries of minimalistic dataset for the IAM schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
//* xref:attachment$iam-data.tql[iam-data.tql] -- TypeQL insert queries for a minimal dataset for the IAM schema.
```

=== Install and run TypeDB

> To proceed, please ensure you have TypeDB server (or cluster)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure you have TypeDB server (or cluster)
```

xref:installation.adoc#_install[installed,window=_blank] and
xref:installation.adoc#_start_the_server[running,window=_blank].

[#_typedb_client]
== Select a TypeDB Client to proceed

Choose either TypeDB Console (CLI) or TypeDB Studio (GUI) in the tabs below and complete all the steps.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> We recommend familiarizing yourself with at least one of these two Clients, before trying to start developing

Reviewer: Join with previous paragraph.

> your own application with language-specific TypeDB Drivers.

Reviewer: Links, please.

Author: We don't want our users to switch to a different page here. That is why I don't provide any links to other Clients until the first tabs-block with the hero image and introduction.

Reviewer: Would your concern be addressed if the pages opened in a new tab? My feeling is that this is such an obvious place to have a hyperlink.

Author: Not really. Unless the tab is opened in the background. Which is quite unusual and probably not viable, even if possible.
The whole paragraph is about NOT trying Drivers before completing this page. So providing the link here seems counter-productive.

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Console::
+
--
TypeDB Console is a CLI TypeDB Client.

image::typedb::quickstart-console.png[TypeDB Console, width = 75%, link=self]

> TypeDB Console is usually installed together with a TypeDB server in the same directory.

Reviewer: I usually run `typedb server` or `typedb console`. Is it useful talk about TypeDB Console as if the user installed it separately?

Author: There is a possibility to install TypeDB without the Console. See the screenshot below for the `server` versions.
<img width="331" alt="Screenshot 2023-10-03 at 15 15 25" src="https://github.com/vaticle/typedb-docs/assets/48120135/1c6032a3-f65f-4c16-a92c-1ec68825e052">

And I'm literally saying that it's usually installed together with TypeDB. Can you please elaborate on that a bit? Do you want me to highlight that they are **usually** distributed together? Or do you want to omit these details and assume that the console was installed with TypeDB by default without saying it?

For more information on how to use it, see the xref:clients:ROOT:console.adoc[,window=_blank] page.
--
TypeDB Studio::
+
--
TypeDB Studio is a GUI TypeDB Client.

image::typedb::quickstart-studio.png[TypeDB Studio, width = 75%, link=self]

TypeDB Studio needs to be
xref:clients:ROOT:studio.adoc#_download_install[installed]

> and launched separately from TypeDB.

Reviewer: "Server"?

Author: That approach has a terminology problem, but I'll see what I can do.
I think it's either the `TypeDB is a standalone application that needs .... separately.` or just adding `server` at the end.

For more information on how to use it, see the xref:clients:ROOT:studio.adoc[,window=_blank] page.
--
====

== Connect to TypeDB

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Console::
+
--

> By default, TypeDB Console will try to connect to the default server address of `localhost:1729`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, TypeDB Console will try to connect to `localhost:1729`.
```

.Server connection example
[,bash]
----
typedb console --server 127.0.0.1:1729
----

.Cluster connection example (TLS encryption enabled)
[,bash]
----
typedb console --cluster=i0.deployment-a4fa2444.cloud.typedb.com:1729 --username=admin --password --tls-enabled --tls-root-ca="/Users/username/typedb-cloud/typedb-cloud-root-ca.pem"
----

> To exit TypeDB Console, press kbd:[Ctrl+C].

Reviewer: Remove. Too obvious.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

[NOTE]
=====
The fastest way to go through all the steps of this guide is to use the
xref:clients:ROOT:console.adoc#_non_interactive_mode[non-interactive]

> mode by issuing the commands directly in a local terminal (not in a TypeDB Console prompt).

Reviewer: It's not clear to me what this means.

Author: It's the justification for us not using the interactive mode.
We can remove it. I was merely highlighting that this is not the only way TypeDB Console can be used. Probably non-essential.

=====
--
TypeDB Studio::
+
--
Connect to TypeDB:

> . Click the btn:[Connect to TypeDB] button on the right side of the toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click btn:[Connect to TypeDB] on the right side of the toolbar.
```

> . Enter TypeDB server address (e.g., `localhost:1729`) in the *Address* field and click the btn:[Connect] button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Enter TypeDB server address (e.g., `localhost:1729`) and then btn:[Connect].
```

Author: ```suggestion
. Enter TypeDB server address (e.g., `localhost:1729`) and click btn:[Connect].
```

> 

Reviewer: Why are the following lines a nested, enumerated list? What's the context?

Author: There is a piece missing here. The second list is for cluster connection only.

1. Select the `TypeDB Cluster` option in the *Server* field.

> 2. Click the btn:[Manage Cluster Addresses] button and add all known addresses for TypeDB servers on the cluster you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click btn:[Manage Cluster Addresses] and add the address for each TypeDB Enterprise node.
```

Author: ```suggestion
2. Click btn:[Manage Cluster Addresses] and add the address for each known TypeDB Enterprise server of a cluster.
```
What do you think of that?

>    are connecting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

3. Fill all other fields with appropriate information and click the btn:[Connect] button.

Select the folder with the <<_download_sample_data,downloaded TypeQL files>> as a

> xref:clients:ROOT:studio.adoc#_open_a_project_directory[project directory,window=_blank] by using one of the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xref:clients:ROOT:studio.adoc#_open_a_project_directory[project directory,window=_blank] by clicking either:
```

> buttons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> * btn:[Open Project] button in the *Project* panel (upper left);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* btn:[Open Project] in the btn:[Project] panel (upper left); or
```

Author: We can't use the semantic markup of buttons to other UI elements for the sake of compatibility.

> * btn:[Open Project Directory] button with a folder icon, leftmost on the top toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Folder icon (first icon on the top toolbar).
```

Author: ```suggestion
* Folder icon (the first icon on the top toolbar).
```

--
====

== Create a new database

> To create a new database, follow the steps below.

Reviewer: No useless sentences, please.

Author: I didn't want to have a heading followed by a tags-block without any top-level content.
Do you think it's OK? Or should we really have something, just something else?

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Console::
+
--

> Use the following command in a local terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

[,bash]
----
typedb console --command="database create try-iam"
----
--
TypeDB Studio::
+
--

> . Open the *Manage Databases* dialog by clicking the database icon on the left side of the toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the database icon (third button on the top toolbar).
```

+
image::studio-database.png[Database Manager button,width = 75%,link=self]

> . Enter `try-iam` in the text field, and click the btn:[Create] button next to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Enter `try-iam` and click btn:[Create].
```

> . Now select `try-iam` from the database dropdown (next to the database icon).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select `try-iam` from the database dropdown (to the right of the database icon).
```

--
====

[#_define_a_schema_from_a_file]
== Define a schema from a file

> Before loading any data into a new database we shall define database's schema.

Reviewer: Remove.

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Console::
+
--

> Use the following command in a local terminal:

Reviewer: Remove.

[,bash]
----
typedb console --command="transaction try-iam schema write" --command="source iam-schema.tql" --command="commit"
----
--
TypeDB Studio::
+
--
Open the xref:typedb::attachment$iam-schema.tql[iam-schema.tql,window=_blank] file in TypeDB Studio.

Execute the define query from the file:

> . Ensure the btn:[Session type] (`schema` / `data`) is set to the `schema` and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Ensure the Session toggle (`schema` / `data`) is set to `schema` and 
```

>   btn:[Transaction type] (`write` / `read`) is set to the `write` in the toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the Transaction toggle (`write` / `read`) is set to `write`.
```

> . Run the query by clicking the btn:[Run Query] button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click btn:[Run Query].
```

> . Commit the changes in transaction by clicking the btn:[Commit Transaction] button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click btn:[Commit Transaction].
```

Author: We have to wait for the query execution before committing. 
```suggestion
. To commit the changes click btn:[Commit Transaction].
```

--
====

> Schema is defined. The database is ready for inserting data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the schema has been defined, data can be inserted into the database.
```

== Load data from a file

> Let's upload some data into the database.

Reviewer: Remove.

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Console::
+
--

> Use the following command in a local terminal:

Reviewer: Remove.

[,bash]
----
typedb console --command="transaction try-iam data write" --command="source iam-data.tql" --command="commit"
----
--
TypeDB Studio::
+
--

> Open the xref:attachment$iam-data.tql[iam-data.tql] file from the project panel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the xref:attachment$iam-data.tql[iam-data.tql] file from the btn:[Project] panel.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Open the xref:attachment$iam-data.tql[iam-data.tql] file from the Project panel.
```

> Load the data into the database selected earlier, by executing the insert queries from the file:

Reviewer: Remove.

Author: We need to have an introductory sentence for the list. I can make it shorter.

> . Ensure the btn:[Session type] (`schema` / `data`) is set to the `data` and the btn:[Transaction type]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Ensure the Session toggle is set to `data` and the Transaction toggle
```

>   (`write` / `read`) is set to the `write` in the toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is set to `write`.
```

> . Execute all queries from the file by clicking the btn:[Run Query] button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Execute *all queries* in the file by clicking btn:[Run Query].
```

Author: ```suggestion
. Execute all queries in the file by clicking btn:[Run Query].
```

> . Commit the changes in transaction by clicking the btn:[Commit Transaction] button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click btn:[Commit Transaction].
```

Author: ```suggestion
. To commit the changes click btn:[Commit Transaction].
```

--
====

> Given there were no errors in the process, the data is persisted in the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming there were no errors in the process, the data is persisted in the database.
```

The database is ready for queries now.
If you want, try some <<_query_examples,query examples>> below with the new database.

[NOTE]
====

> The IAM schema and data from this Quickstart guide are widely used in examples throughout the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IAM schema and data from this Quickstart guide are used throughout the documentation.
```

Reviewer: "Documentation" or "this Quickstart guide"?

Author: Both

====

[#_query_examples]
== Query examples

> We have prepared a few query examples below:

Reviewer: Remove.

Author: We need to have an introductory sentence for the list

* <<#_get_query__retrieve_all_data>>
* <<#_get_query__retrieve_all_schema_types>>
* <<#_get_query__get_all_emails_of_kevin>>
* <<#_insert_query__add_a_new_email_for_kevin>>
* <<#_update_query__change_the_newly_added_email_for_kevin>>
* <<#_delete_query__delete_ownership_of_the_newly_updated_email_from_kevin>>

For more TypeQL query examples, check the xref:typeql:ROOT:overview.adoc[TypeQL] documentation.
//#todo Add the TypeDB in 20 queries page

[#_get_query__retrieve_all_data]
=== Get all data

> The following query retrieves all data from a database.

Reviewer: Remove.

Author: This falls into the `(1) Description` category

[,typeql]
----

> match $t isa thing;

Reviewer: Does this query still work?

Author: Yes. It wasn't even deprecated yet.

Author: I have removed the warning from the Quickstart guide so that it wouldn't scare of anyone too soon. https://github.com/vaticle/typedb-docs/pull/723/files#diff-75ab68a7ad95df5c805f1c7b7ace1ec2d70f8fddc3bb8b12ccfbca0bff1382b1

----

> To try it, choose a TypeDB Client below and follow the steps.

Reviewer: Remove from here…

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Console::
+
--
Use the following command in a local terminal:
[,bash]
----
typedb console --command="transaction try-iam data read" --command='match $t isa thing;'
----
--
TypeDB Studio::
+
--
. Select `data` session and `read` transaction in the top toolbar.
. Open a new tab and insert the following TypeQL query:
+
[,typeql]
----
match $t isa thing;
----
. Run the query.
--

> ====

Reviewer: …to here.

[#_get_query__retrieve_all_schema_types]

> === Get all schema types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Get all types
```

> The following query retrieves all types from a schema of a database.

Reviewer: Remove.

[,typeql]
----
match $t sub thing;
----

> To try it, choose a TypeDB Client below and follow the steps.

Reviewer: Remove from here…

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Console::
+
--
Use the following command in a local terminal:
[,bash]
----
typedb console --command="transaction try-iam schema read" --command='match $t sub thing;'
----
--
TypeDB Studio::
+
--
. Select `data` session and `read` transaction in the top toolbar.
. Open a new tab and insert the following TypeQL query:
+
[,typeql]
----
match $t sub thing;
----
. Run the query.
--

> ====

Reviewer: …to here.

=== Delete ownership of the newly updated email from Kevin

The following query deletes the ownership over the email "kevin2@gmail.com" for every person with a full name
that contains "Kevin".
We have only one such person in the IAM database we have created above.

[,typeql]
----
match
    $p isa person,
        has full-name $fn,
        has email $e;
    $fn contains "Kevin";
    $e = "kevin2@gmail.com";
delete $p has $e;
----

To try it, choose a TypeDB Client below and follow the steps.

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Console::
+
--
Use the following command in a local terminal:
[,bash]
----
typedb console --command="transaction try-iam data write" --command='match $p isa person, has full-name $fn, has email $e; $fn contains "Kevin"; $e = "kevin2@gmail.com"; delete $p has $e;' --command="commit"
----
--
TypeDB Studio::
+
--
. Select `data` session and `write` transaction in the top toolbar.
. Open a new tab and insert the following TypeQL query:
+
[,typeql]
----
match
    $p isa person,
        has full-name $fn,
        has email $e;
    $fn contains "Kevin";
    $e = "kevin2@gmail.com";
delete $p has $e;
----
. Run the query.
. Commit the transaction.
--
====

> 

Reviewer: Condense all of the above examples to just: (1) description and (2) TypeQL code. No references to Console or Studio are necessary.

[#_get_query__retrieve_all_data]
=== Get all data

[,typeql]
----
match $t isa thing;
----

> Retrieves all data from a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieve all data from a database:
```
The typical voice for sentences like this in English is imperative. Please change throughout if you've chosen to shorten a sentence in a parallel way.

I also prefer a colon (':') as an introduction, but this is a stylistic opinion.

get $e;
----

> Retrieves all emails owned by every person with a full name that contains "Kevin".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieve all emails owned by each person with a full name that contains "Kevin" (we have only one such person in the example database):
```

Author: I generally try to use less parenthesis. This particular statement seems good enough to be a standalone sentence, IMHO. Do you think it is better to make it more vague about the IAM and not a standalone sentence?

Author: I experimented with different ways to do this and settled with your variant.

> We have only one such person in the IAM database we have created above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

insert $p has email "kevin2@gmail.com";
----

Updates the new email "kevin@gmail.com" for every person with a full name that contains "Kevin"
to be "kevin2@gmail.com" instead.

> It does that by deleting ownership over attribute with old value

Reviewer: There should be alarms ringing in your head when you see _two_ pronouns with unclear antecedents (namely, "it" and "that"). Please rephrase.
